Hi, thank you for joining us.
I'm glad to see a good number of
you found your way back over to
the conference center to catch
up with the rest of our sessions.
Our next session is going to
be moving to WebObjects 5,
so I'd like to introduce
Melissa Turner from the engineering team
to come up and start the procession off.
As Tony told you, my name's Melissa.
I'm one of the WebObjects
deployment engineers,
and I'm going to be your
presenter for the next hour or so.
First,
we might as well get it out of the way.
Yes, I'm an engineer.
Yes, I'm female.
Sometimes it happens.
Thank you.
This is the session 6.05,
Moving to WebObjects, and...
I hit the wrong direction.
This session assumes that you
have some knowledge of WebObjects.
We're primarily going to concentrate
on some of the conversion issues for
those of you who have a WebObjects
4.5 or WebObjects 4.5.1 application
that you want to move to WebObjects 5.
We're going to cover some of the
benefits of moving to WebObjects 5.
We're going to cover how you
would go about migrating an
application to WebObjects 5.
And we're going to talk about some of
the new improvements and some of the
features in the WebObjects 5 Frameworks.
I am not going to cover
anything in-depth.
I'm not going to cover
EOF or Java Client.
We have entire sessions devoted to those.
Some of them,
I believe there's one following this.
I recommend it highly.
But remember,
anything that I don't cover is
going to be covered elsewhere.
What is WebObjects 5?
This is a question we've
gotten from several people.
WebObjects 5 is essentially
WebObjects 4.5.1 ported to Java.
It has the same feature set.
It's got essentially the
same APIs as WebObjects 4.5.
There's a few exceptions
that we'll talk about later.
On Windows,
it uses the 4.5 developer tools
that you're all familiar with.
We have a new project builder,
as you all know, on 10,
and we have integrated with that.
EOModeler, WoBuilder,
and the rule editor have been aquified,
but other than that,
they're pretty much the same.
For those of you who want
to do split deployments,
the WebObjects 5 monitoring tools are
capable of dealing with and managing
WebObjects 4.5.1 applications,
and we have some new features.
What are some of the benefits
of moving to WebObjects 5?
Well, there's a number of them.
The big one for a lot of you,
and I know this has been a concern,
is that WebObjects 4.5 used
an older version of the JDK.
That's over.
WebObjects 5 uses the JDK 1.3.1,
actually, I believe.
For those of you who are on Windows,
you'll notice that we do
still install a 1.1.8 JRE.
This is purely for the use of our tools.
You should not use it.
You should just pretend it isn't there.
The big thing about moving to the
JDK 1.3 is that it allows you to
integrate with a lot of the new and
third-party tools that are out there.
Development environments, debuggers,
optimizers,
a lot of tools that you didn't have
access to when you were writing
in the bridge Java environment.
And it makes it a lot easier for you
to integrate with third-party products,
because as we all know,
there's a lot of mindshare
in the Java world.
There's a lot of people producing
packages to do everything from
control robots to do reporting.
You now have access to
all of those packages.
And because we've moved to JDBC,
you'll also have extended
database connectivity.
This means that you no longer have
to wait for a database company to
come out with a set of native client
libraries on whichever platform
it is you'd like to deploy on.
Most database companies
ship Type 4 JDBC drivers,
which plug into our JDBC adapter,
and things should work much more easily.
You can do development on Mac OS X or
on Windows as you could in 4.5.1,
and we also support deployment
on those platforms plus Solaris.
One of the other big features of
WebObjects 5 is that it's much easier
to develop on one platform and then move
your application to another platform.
There's no issues with
remembering your LD library path,
there's no dynamic
shared libraries issues,
things go much more smoothly.
And we've had some
performance improvements.
Ernie talked a little bit about
this a couple of days ago.
We did some benchmarking
comparing WebObjects 4.5.1
with WebObjects 5 on Windows,
Mac OS X, and Solaris.
And lo and behold,
we discovered that we did a good
job of converting to pure Java.
We're faster on all platforms.
On Mac OS X,
we're about 22% faster than a comparable
app written in pure Objective-C.
This is not comparing
against Bridge Java.
This is pure Objective-C.
We're about 22% faster on Mac OS X.
We're even better on Windows.
We're about 51% faster.
And on Solaris, a platform that I know
a lot of you deploy on,
we're over 180% faster.
So, we're very happy with that,
and we think you will be, too.
So now that we told you that, yes,
there are some serious benefits
to moving to WebObjects 5,
a lot of you are going
to have the question,
should I convert or not?
And people who should convert are
people who have Objective-C or
WebScript apps that are very
early in their development phase,
or people who have existing bridge
Java projects that they may be in
deployment or they may be in development.
It's very easy to port
bridge Java to pure Java.
And anyone who requires access
to more Java standards or to
third-party products should also
consider moving to WebObjects 5.
People who should not consider,
or at least should be seriously
contemplative about moving to
WebObjects 5 are people who have
Objective-C projects that use
a lot of low-level Objective-C.
If you're using categories,
if you're using posers,
if you have Object-C message
send anywhere in your code,
you may want to think twice
about migrating because it means
you're doing things with the
Objective-C dynamic runtime that
cannot be done easily in Java.
If you've got a lot of basic C code,
if you're using lots of
third-party C libraries,
you're doing a lot of
nasty pointer manipulation,
you may also want to think
twice about it because that's
a more complicated conversion.
And if you've got an app that's already
in production and it's not being updated,
there is an old engineering rule
of thumb that I learned when
I first started programming.
It's, if it ain't broke, don't fix it.
If you're happy with your application,
it's making you money,
you don't need to change it,
by all means, don't.
Next question,
once you've decided to convert,
is how do you go about converting?
We provide a tool called Java Converter
that basically allows you to...
Simply and programmatically convert
your WebObjects application from
4.5 to a pure Java environment.
On Windows, this is located at
nextroot/library/webobjects/java/applic
ations/javaconverter.woa.
On Mac OS X, this is at
system/library/webobjects/java/applic
ations/javaconverter.woa.
It claims to be a .woa,
but it really isn't.
We're just leveraging the packaging.
You run it from a shell
inside the .woa directory,
and it's a fairly simple thing to do.
You enter your command script plus
the full path of the project directory
or files that you want to convert,
and you hit return,
and we take over from there.
If you want to migrate
using the Java converter,
there's a few ways you can do it.
If you want to convert
on a file-by-file basis,
you can take an individual C,
Objective-C, or WebScript file and
convert that to pure Java.
Or you can convert an entire
project directory at once.
Or if you're feeling a
little bit more constrained,
you have code that's possibly
in the nastier areas,
you may want to consider doing a
hybrid project and migrating first to
bridge Java on a file-by-file basis,
and then once you have all of those done,
moving them to pure Java.
Or you may want to move your entire
project first to bridge Java,
and then to pure Java.
This could give those of you who have
lots of categories and posers and
that kind of thing a little bit more
time to do your conversion without
having to disrupt your application.
Some of the advantages of using
Java Converter that we don't
touch your original source code,
we lay down a parallel set of
files as the ones we converted.
If there's a conversion
problem in the converter,
we clearly describe
the error in your code,
in the new code, as a JC error,
a JC warning, or JC info.
We also print the transcript,
a little warning that something happened,
so you can just go off and search
and find out what the problem was.
We've tested the Java Converter
against most of the
Objective-C frameworks we've got.
We've tested it against WAF,
we tested it against EOF, EO Control,
EO Access.
We converted many of
our examples using it.
We've done a bunch of internal
code that you will never see.
It's extensible with customized top
scripts if there's something that you
need it to do that it doesn't already do,
and it's a lot faster
than manual conversion.
What I can say is that when we did,
before we had the Java converter,
we were converting by hand,
and we were managing to do about 300,
350 lines a day.
Once we got the Java converter in play,
that jumped up to 3,000 to
4,000 lines of code a day.
You can spend an awful lot of
time moving brackets around.
Some of the limitations, though,
are that we cannot convert
your EO model file.
You're going to have to go in and
manually change the adapter and possibly
add or remove a little bit of data.
We don't change any of the APIs that
you've put in your WAD files or in
any of your other archive files.
And if you have Objective-C code
that relies on posers,
categories, that kind of thing,
we cannot fully convert it.
We can create helper classes that
will take the place of your category,
but you're going to have
to go through your code.
And in any place where you were calling
a method that was in the category,
you're going to have to redirect
it to use the helper class.
C code, as I've mentioned,
we can change the C function
invocation to a method call,
but we can't translate whatever's
on the other end of the method.
And we can't determine which new
API you should be hooking up to,
so you're going to have
to do that by yourselves.
And the conversion process does
take you about 80% of the way there,
though.
And I'm sure a lot of you are going,
yeah, right, it can't be that easy.
So I'm going to call for help.
I'm going to call Francois Jouel up,
and he's going to convert one of the
examples that we shipped with WebObjects
451 right here on stage in front of you.
Hello, welcome everybody.
So, some people know me already.
I already did last year's
presentation on Java Converter
and I will attempt the app.
Impossible today.
I will convert here with
no net to protect me.
An application we are shipping.
Well, we used to ship in 4.5.
So, do we have the window?
Okay.
So, as Melissa said,
Java Converter is a terminal-based tool.
And I am going to go execute it.
I have here a ThinkMovie application.
I cannot open it because
it's a 4.5 application.
But trust me, it's here.
I'm going to go in the project directory.
Here is the ThinkMovie application.
Now, in my Java Applications folder,
I have the Java Converter application.
And inside the .joa, as Melissa said,
there is...
The Java Converter Tool So to
use the Java Converter Tool,
I just make it point to my
Think Movies application.
And I have my cofers.
Cofers?
Gofers.
Gofers?
Yeah.
Okay, it started.
Now I can go have a coffee.
I don't have to type anything.
It will generate the classes,
the Java classes.
It will create a new project,
copy everything in a new directory so
that it doesn't stomp on existing files.
And that's it.
Well, I think that's it,
but only 80% of the work is done.
I'm going to do manually the last
20%. So here I have file merge.
Do most of you know what FileMerge is?
It's a very powerful UI-based GIF tool.
And I'm going to compare
what I had originally and the
output of the Java converter.
Okay, I have both of them here.
So you notice that it
changed quite a bit of files.
But if I look at these files,
there is mainly one difference.
And we'll look at the files
where there are more differences,
but for example, over the file with just
one difference here.
All the Java converter needed to
do is to change import statements.
No big deal.
Let's look at a more complicated file.
What does this one do?
Just some package renaming
here on the second change.
And this one is even more complicated.
So here we have the case of an
API change that Java Converter
Did for you, actually,
this instead of returning a component,
we now return an interface.
And here are some warnings that
Java Converter put in for you.
And in this case,
the warnings are not very
useful because the syntax was
correct in the first place.
And here there were some changes that
Melissa will talk more about later on.
NSGogorianDate has been
replaced by NSTimestamp.
And all the APIs and class names
have been changed accordingly.
More on this time stamp changes.
OK, and you can trust me.
Most of these are just the same.
Right?
You trust me?
Yes.
Okay, so now the next step is to
open the new converted project
in the new project builder.
So I'm going to click on "import
pb.projects". This is one of the
wizard that project builder comes with.
And I'm going to point it
to the converted project.
Are people coughing on purpose?
Okay, so that's it.
I have my classes here.
My components, everything is ready,
even the frameworks are here.
So one good thing about
conversion is that it enables
you to do a lot of cleanup.
Because Objective-C and the
bridge were really lenient,
you could go along and have
a lot of inconsistencies.
And you'll notice that most of
the changes I'm going to go and
do now are to fix inconsistencies.
Here's a framework that we
didn't use that was there listed,
so I'm just going to remove it.
One framework I do need to add
is the JDBC Adaptal Framework.
Here.
And I'm not as good as Steve Heyman,
so I'll just select all the targets.
Here, I put it at the right place,
it looks better.
What else?
I have a new model and I'm going
to open it because I know I need
to do some changes in there.
Java Converter does not
fix the e-models for you.
I will go and switch adapter.
This is the JDBC adapter.
You have the non-adapter.
I don't recommend using the non-adapter.
Use the JDBC one.
It won't take you far.
Now here, another thing that I found that
was inconsistent in this model
is that we had a lot of packages,
business logic server,
and we never referenced these
packages anywhere in our project.
So why keep,
and actually Java will refuse to run
our app if we keep these packages.
So I'm going to get rid of them.
Now if I inspect one of these,
at this point I should be
able to go and fetch it.
My OpenBase database is running
and I can look at entries.
So, if I go and look... I think
I have something else to fix.
Yes, here.
One tricky point in
the EO model is that...
Most of the number classes
cannot be resolved automatically
by the JDBC adapter.
So here you see that the value
type for number is set to an int,
and that's correct.
But here for big decimal
we have no value type.
So this has to be fixed to the capital B.
This is the type in the model,
this is the type in Java at the
end when I run the application,
the class, and this is the type,
the intermediate type set
up by the JDBC adapter.
If you have questions about that,
I recommend going to the
advanced EOS session.
Is there any more of these?
This number... There is one more,
I have to find it.
It is... in the movies.
Number, big decimal, here, this one.
It needs to be fixed.
No, I won't forget to save it.
Leave it open just in
case I forgot something.
Okay, now I think I can build.
Let's see what kind of errors I get.
[Transcript missing]
So I'm just walking through it like
you would if you're a developer.
So I will know the app compiled,
so I'm now starting the
application from Project Builder.
And it will start Internet Explorer.
OK, so here I had an error.
And I'm going to go try and
figure out what's wrong.
It's saying that it was not
able to create the page main.
I can close this one.
Let me go to the terminal.
So when you cannot create the main page,
it means it's pretty bad.
And I know where it is.
If you remember during
the file merge conversion,
when I used file merge,
There was a change
done here on this line.
And Java Converter is clever enough
to recognize an application and
to insert a main function so that
the application can be started.
Except here,
it was not able to recognize it because
there was a complete package specified.
It was not clever enough to recognize
that this is actually what application.
So I need to add this main
function myself by hand.
So all this main
function does is forward.
So call the main call to
our own main function.
I will save and stop that and recompile.
[Transcript missing]
It seems to work okay.
I mean... Boy, I hate this movie.
I won't enter a review,
but I still hate it.
Let's add a test.
See if the features of this app work.
Okay, so there is another problem,
which is to be expected.
And the problem is in this...
New NSDictionary here and the
page is... what page was this?
A display video page.
So let's try to look at
this display video page.
So this Play Video page
doesn't have an NSDictionary,
but takes a mutable dictionary.
So I'm just going to go fix that,
and that will be it.
Once again, I don't know how the bridge
could live with this,
frankly.
But pure Java doesn't take it.
[Transcript missing]
There.
Actually, an old one there, too.
Okay, so that's about all it takes.
So, as you see, 80% of the work was done.
The last 20% interesting part was
left to you on most of what we did was
cleaning up an imperfect model on an
imperfect application in the first place.
So, as you all write perfect code,
you should have much
less problems than we do,
even in our examples.
If I may, I will just do one last thing
and open up again the window
where I did the conversion.
And if I just type Java converter,
I see the...
The set of parameters
that can be passed to it.
You have a flag to stop the conversion
at the Bridge Java application.
So if you're converting from
Objective-C to Bridge Java,
you can do that with this flag.
You have a flag
When you are using Objective-C conversion
to specify extra headers,
to resolve macros and so on,
you can also give special
instructions to the precompiler.
And you can specify
your project directory,
an Objective-C file, a BridgeJava file,
or a WebScript file.
And then there is a description
of all the other flags.
So one point I want to make
that Melissa didn't is that
the bridge Java conversion will
only work on Windows NT because,
as you know, WebObjects 5 does not run
bridge Java applications.
And WebObjects 4.5 on Mac OS X does not
run any bridge Java application either.
So while you're on Windows NT,
you can use Microsoft's
converter from Java to C#,
and you get a 64% conversion to C#.
That will be it.
And give back the mic to Melissa.
Thanks Francois.
So as you can see,
most of the problems you're
going to run across in doing
conversion of applications are,
well, many of them are going
to be your own fault.
Now I'm going to talk about what
you're going to see in your code
after conversion has happened.
You take the Java converter, you run it,
and as Francois showed you,
we do some stuff to your original code.
There's two general classes of
things you'll see afterwards.
There's stuff we've put in
specifically to help with conversion,
and there's stuff that is new in our
frameworks and is intended to be ongoing.
We've added some convenience classes to
help you port your code to pure Java:
NSComparator, NSBundle, WoeTimer.
These are things that often
have equivalents that,
you know, you could write Java code
to do what they do,
but we figured we'd save you the trouble.
We've left some classes like
NSCoder and NSCoding in,
although they're now completely abstract.
We removed a few things: NSRunLoops,
NSUserDefaults,
and we changed the validation
mechanism to be more in line
with the way Java works.
NSComparator is a pretty simple class.
It encapsulates NSComparisonResult
from Objective-C.
We only use it in a couple of places.
We use it in
NSArraysSortUsingComparator method,
and it basically sorts the elements of
the receiving array into a new array.
We use it in
NSMutableArraysSortUsingComparator
method,
which sorts in place the
elements of the array.
If you're writing new Java code,
you may want to consider making
any classes that you're going
to be sorting comparable.
This will have sort of two things.
Comparable isn't an exact
match to NSComparator,
but it does allow you...
to create one really simple
comparator to use in these things
that simply defers to the comparable
methods on your underlying objects.
NSBundle is going to be pretty
familiar to those of you who
work with the Objective-C.
It corresponds to the directory
where related resources are stored.
It still has some deprecated APIs to
help people who are converting from 4.5.
And we've extended the functionality
to handle properties files
and we have some new APIs for
finding and loading resources.
For those of you who are using it in 4.5,
you should note that the Java class
loader does not support the
concept of dynamic class loading,
so there is no concept of
loadable bundles in WebObjects 5.
We've renamed and deleted some stuff.
Most of it shouldn't worry you very much,
but just so you know that it happened,
we renamed NSTimer to WoeTimer,
and we don't use it for
session timeouts anymore.
NSRunLoop has been removed.
For those of you who get
into decompiling code,
we have a private WoeRunLoop that we
use for Woe application-specific stuff,
but you should not be trying to use it.
And we've removed NSArchiver,
which was the concrete
subclass of NSCoder.
We'll talk a little bit more about that
when we talk about serialization later.
User Defaults is one thing
that took a fairly serious hit.
We've actually deprecated the
User Defaults class itself,
although the sort of concept
of defaults exists in a class,
NSProperties,
that we'll also talk about later.
Some of the default names,
now property names, have been deprecated.
Woe Debugging Enabled,
EO Adapter Debugging Enabled,
NSProject Search Path.
They're still there,
but they do different things and
they may not be there for long.
And some defaults have been renamed.
Woe CGI Adapter URL is
now Woe Adapter URL,
and Woe Should Send Lifebeat
is now Woe Lifebeat Enabled.
We'll talk more about properties
and what they've become later.
And we had to change the
validation mechanism.
To review,
for those of you who have had 4.5,
but you wrote those
methods a long time ago,
validation methods in 4.5 took a pointer
to the target object as their parameter.
They returned an exception object.
If, for some reason,
the target object was invalid,
and if coercion was necessary,
that would happen as a side
effect on the target object.
Well,
having side effects on target objects
that are passed in as parameters isn't
something that Java's really good at.
A lot of Java's value classes
are final and immutable.
So we had to change that.
So validation methods in 4.5, once again,
they take the object as their parameter,
but instead of acting by side effect,
they return the valid value for
that parameter as the return value.
So validation methods in 4.5, once again,
they take the object as their parameter,
but instead of acting by side effect,
they return the valid value for
that parameter as the return value.
So validation methods in 4.5, once again,
they take the object as their parameter,
but instead of acting by side effect,
they return the valid value for
that parameter as the return value.
And if for some reason that
parameter value was invalid,
they throw an NSValidation
validation exception.
If they do return null,
that should be interpreted as
coercion to the null value in Java.
Note that the Java converter
doesn't take care of this for you.
You're going to have to go through
and look at your validation
methods and figure out what
they really should be returning.
Here's some examples of method signatures
in Objective-C 4.5 Java and 5 Java.
The first one is pretty simple.
It's a validate street address.
It takes a pointer to a string,
and you can see that it
returns an NSException.
4.5 Java looks very similar
because we're going through
Java wrappers to actually use
Objective-C classes underlying the Java.
Again, we pass in a string,
which is down there in the bridge,
interpreted as an NSString,
which can be mutable if it needs to be,
and we return a void.
Or, we don't return anything,
I suppose would be a
better way to put it.
That would be that one.
And the final one is the correct
way to do this in WebObjects 5.
Again, you see that we're taking
a string parameter value,
but also see that instead
of returning a void,
we now return a string and
throw a validation exception.
That's pretty much all there is to it.
And now on to the new
and interesting stuff.
We're engineers.
We don't know when to
leave well enough alone.
We have to constantly add new stuff
to our products or we get unhappy.
So we've added some new stuff.
We've added a bunch of time classes,
NSTimestamp, NSTimestampFormatter,
NSTimeZone.
We've added NSSocketUtilities to
help you with creating sockets.
We created a new class called NSLog and,
as I mentioned earlier, NSProperties.
We've done some stuff with NSLocking,
which some of you may be familiar with.
We've changed key value coding
around a little bit and we've
moved to Java serialization.
We've also done some stuff in other,
you know, less central WebObjects
packages like Woe Mail Delivery,
Woe Smile, and Java Plot.
Why NS timestamp?
This is a question that we've had
several times already at this conference.
We've had it from
people who saw the beta.
We've had it from people who, you know,
immediately download,
install the WebObjects developer
stuff from the CD you got.
We wanted to basically give
you all of the functionality
that was in NSGregorianDate
in our WebObjects 5 product.
And we ran into some issues in the JDK.
First off,
for those of you who've looked at it,
you know that their time zone class
does not contain historical information.
And as we were trying to implement that,
we ran into some other assumption
conflicts with the way we were
implementing time zone and the
way their date classes worked.
So we needed to create a time
class to work with our time zones.
Why didn't we call it
NSCalendarDate or NSGregorianDate?
No great deep reason.
We wanted to show that it was
descending from Java SQL timestamp.
And to a certain extent,
the word calendar is
already in use in Java.
And given that our timestamps
don't work at all in the same way,
we didn't want to introduce
any possible confusion.
One thing to remember is that you really
shouldn't use our stuff with their stuff.
It doesn't work too well.
You will see weird behavior.
NSTimestamp, as I said,
is a subclass of Java SQL Timestamp.
It replaces all uses of NSCalendarDate,
or for those of you in
the bridge Java world,
NSGregorianDate.
It provides most of the
same functionality that
you saw in 4.5 or 4.5.1,
and EOF maps database
datatypes into NSTimestamps.
Something that has changed noticeably
that may affect a few of you is
that we have a new reference date.
We've moved from January 1, 2000 UTC,
which was the
Objective-C sort of time zero,
to January 1, 1970 UTC,
which is the Java and
Unix standard time zero.
We've also added a
timestamp formatter to,
well, format timestamps,
subclass of Java text format.
It doesn't really do much,
although one thing that you
might be pleased to hear is that
it's capable of dealing with
Objective-C pattern specifiers,
as well as Java pattern specifiers.
And it's a little bit heavyweight,
so if you've got an application
that formats timestamps into
strings in a number of places,
you may want to consider creating
one timestamp formatter and
sharing it amongst all the stuff.
We've created NSTimeZone.
As I mentioned earlier,
this allows you to have a correct
historical and geographical
context for your time.
It's a subclass of Java Util TimeZone.
It's built using the standard
zone info files that you get from,
by FTP, from lc.nci.nih.gov.
This basically lets you,
and there will be a
till about this later,
you can, if those files change,
you can download the new versions,
compile them,
and drop them into WebObjects
to get the new zone info.
And it should only be used,
as I mentioned, can't reiterate enough,
with our time classes.
Don't try and mix and match with Java.
NSSocket Utilities is a fairly
simple class that we added to let
you specify connection timeouts,
and if socket creation fails,
it will throw an I/O exception.
Without the utilities,
there can be a problem on some platforms
where failing to create a socket
will hang your system indefinitely,
and we kind of thought
that was a bad idea.
It's fairly simple to
use NSSocket utilities.
Here's an example of how you'd create
a socket using the standard Java way.
You see you've got your
constructor taking an address,
a port, a local address,
and a local port.
This is the equivalent in
using NSSocket utilities.
It's a factory method
that takes an address,
a port, a local address, a local port,
and a connection timeout
measured in milliseconds.
And notice that we catch the exception,
which means there's no socket and
we have to deal with that somehow.
NSProperties, as I mentioned earlier,
replaces NSUserDefaults.
It's basically a wrapper to the
standard Java properties mechanism,
which you can see defined
in Java UtilProperties.
It's a convenience class for
merging application properties
with standard system properties
with framework properties and
all that kind of lovely stuff.
For conversion,
people who are converting,
a lot of the methods that
were on NSUserDefaults are
still around on NSProperties.
What are properties?
Where are properties?
Properties can be read
from a number of sources.
There's a set of standard system
properties that come with your VM.
There's user-specific properties
stored in hot Java properties.
Your frameworks can have
their own properties files.
Your application can
have a properties file,
and you can specify them
on the command line.
We use the standard Java conflict
resolution mechanism,
which states that the last property
read is the one that gets used.
They're read in this order.
It's worth knowing.
More details.
Properties files must
be named properties,
and they must be located in
the resources directory of your
framework or your application.
They're in the standard
Java properties format,
which is that they're in a file.
Each property is on its own line.
Each line has the format.
Property key equals property value
with no spaces around the equalizer.
If you want to specify the
properties on the command line,
you use the standard Java-D flag,
although we do also,
in a deprecated fashion,
support the old Objective-C format
for command line arguments.
NSLog, I mentioned.
This is a class that we're
actually pretty excited about.
We think it's neat.
We think it should be very
useful to most of you.
There's actually three classes involved.
There's NSLog,
which is a static class that
allows you to interface with
the WebObjects logging system.
There's Logger,
which is an abstract class that defines
sort of the core functionality in
which you should subclass if you want
to do your own logging mechanism.
And we provide one concrete subclass,
the PrintStreamLogger,
which will basically log
your output to a PrintStream.
Why do you want to use it?
Well, there's a few reasons.
It's set up to allow you to control
the scope and granularity of debugging.
You can set up debug
groups and debug levels,
which will allow you to say,
if you have an application that does...
HTML generation has business
logic and has database access.
You can separate by debug groups
logging in each of those areas,
and you can turn only one of
them on at a time if you want.
Or you can use debug levels to say, well,
I'm in development,
but I don't want to have to
worry about touching my code
when I go out of development.
So I want all of this logging
to happen at one debug level,
but once I move into deployment,
I want to set a different debug level,
and I'll only see really critical stuff.
You can redirect the output however
you want by subclassing logger.
We provide the print stream.
You can set it up to do email or
anything else you really want.
If you decide that you want
to turn on verbose logging,
it will also print out the timestamp
at which the logging happened and
the thread that did the logging.
This can be useful if you're trying to
track down synchronization problems.
And there's an issue, known issue,
with Java Runtime Exec,
which is that if you launch a
child process using Exec and then
don't pull data out of the child
process's out and error streams,
then your child process will eventually
hang when its buffers get full.
Again, we don't think freezing is good.
Here's a sample of how
to create a debug group.
It's pretty simple.
You'll notice that it's long and
that we're left shifting by 40.
The first 32 bits are in use by
internal WebObjects logging stuff.
The other 32 are open for you
to use however you'd like to.
The second bit is an example of
how you would pass in a command
line parameter to enable debugging.
Here's your command line.
Basically, you read in the property.
Standard Java, this is how you read
properties mechanism.
If it says you should be debugging,
then enable the verbose debugging
on the debug out and error streams.
Enable debugging for the
group that we defined earlier,
and set the level to informational.
This will print out everything
in that debug group.
It's fairly simple to redirect the
output to a different directory.
Again, you pass something in in the
standard Java properties format.
Again,
you read a standard Java system property.
If the property is there,
create a print stream pointing at
that file and set as appropriate.
Here we show setting NSLOG debug.
You can also set
NSLOG out and NSLOG error.
If you want, you can set that to null and
no logging will happen at all.
Hi, my name is RD Willhoite.
I just want to get this out
of the way to begin with.
I'm not female and I'm not French,
but I am a WebObjects engineer,
so it does sometimes happen.
Today I'm going to be telling you about
a different manner of interacting with
the WebObjects application server.
As Melissa alluded,
I will be talking about NSLog.
I'm also going to be talking
about the Willmail Delivery class,
which is not new to WebObjects 5,
but has been revised slightly.
Now it uses the SMTP client class
in Sun's standard class libraries.
I'm going to show you two different
forms of email integration.
The first thing that I'm going to
show you is sending of WebObjects
components to a hypothetical customer.
The second thing that I'm going to show
you is sending of critical error messages
to a hypothetical system administrator.
For demonstration convenience,
I'm going to be using the same
email address for both the customer
and the system administrator.
Obviously,
this wouldn't be the case in real life,
but I only have one web browser here.
I'm sorry, one mail browser here.
Also,
in order to clarify the demonstration,
my application copies some of the
images from the Think Movies example,
but it isn't actually
the Think Movies example.
It's just a partial mock-up.
I'm not sure if we're going to
be able to make the source code
for the demonstration available,
but I didn't want to confuse
you if you do have a chance
to look at the source code.
As many of you may know,
the WoMail Delivery class is capable
of emailing a message to a customer.
You can use this as an alternative
mechanism for interacting with
the web application server.
Let's take a look at our project.
We are going to be looking
at the application class,
and more specifically at the
constructor for the application class.
One of the most interesting things
that's happening in the constructor,
which is going to be
invoked at startup time,
so we're going to magically see an
email appear in our mail browser,
is that we're invoking a direct
action called send email form action.
If we go and look at this direct action,
We see that it's very simple.
It really only does one thing:
compose component email.
So we're going to be sending an email
using a page component called email
form to a pre-specified recipient.
I'm not going to show you the
source for the page component.
You'll see the results of the
source when I launch this thing.
So let's fire it up and see what happens.
As this thing starts up,
I wanted to mention that I'm doing
some of the configuration on the sly of
the SMTP host used by WoMail delivery,
as well as the recipient and
sender and all that stuff,
using command line arguments in
Project Builder's launch panel.
So that's how it's finding
out all of this information.
So it's started.
Let's go and look at our mail browser.
And we see that our friendly
WebObjects application has sent us
and email, and this is a list of
movies that we can rent.
Each movie is represented by a hyperlink.
I'll choose my favorite one.
I don't know if any of you
can guess which one that is.
For some reason IE wants
to insert itself.
I don't know,
I think Microsoft is wanting
to get on stage with me.
But anyway,
I'm going to go back to the project
to show you what's happening behind
the scenes before we see what happens,
what the result of clicking
on the hyperlink is.
So if we go and we look at
the direct action class again,
clicking on the hyperlink actually
invokes a second direct action
called rent selected movie action.
And this action does two things.
The first thing that it does is
that it sends a confirmation email
to our hypothetical customer.
This is essentially the same
thing that we've just done,
so that's not especially interesting.
The second and more interesting thing
that we do is that we do a bit of
investigation as to what movie we've got.
And we see that the application
has come back to us and...
It's given us the confirmation email,
but uh-oh, we've received a system error.
So this is intended, obviously,
for the system administrator,
not the customer.
It's an atrocious cinema alert.
Apparently the...
Apparently the WebObjects application
doesn't like my choice of movies.
Going back to the project,
let's see if we can answer the question,
how is this email being sent?
So we saw here that we're actually
checking what movie we're selecting.
This thing isn't emailing it every time.
I don't have anything behind
the magic curtains here.
All that it's doing is it's
invoking the Appendlan method of
the error member of the NSLog class.
And you can see that it's
just passing a string.
And the string,
I happen to use HTML because it
looks nicer in the mail browser.
Because we have nice
HTML rendering in mail.app.
But you could do any string.
Obviously it doesn't have to be HTML.
But the real question is,
how is the email being generated?
This is not really clear here
because as Melissa mentioned,
our default loggers,
which are the print stream loggers,
spew things to the console as
well as to specified files.
So.
What's happening here?
What happens is that the
logger class is actually an
abstract class as she mentioned.
And you can subclass it.
As a matter of fact,
you can insert this thing
into the NSLog class,
which is the broker for all
of the logging interactions.
You see here in the declaration
that we're extending
NSLog's logger inner class.
And if you look at the
class initialization,
you see that we are initializing
all this stuff using those commands.
command line arguments
that I mentioned before.
We create a new instance
of the MailLogger class.
We set the error member of
NSLog using this new instance,
which you saw before.
The local variable is called error.
That's the mail logger instance.
So, unfortunately,
this doesn't really tell us
how the email is being sent.
To understand that,
we need to go and look
at the AppendLin method.
There's a lot of code here.
This example is complete.
It's a simple example,
but it is a complete example.
We're not going to be talking
about all of the accessor methods
and all the rest of that jazz.
As you can see here,
it's hard to see with a big font,
but I'm actually in the
AppendLin method now.
This is an abstract method.
I've implemented it here,
but instead of using print streams,
I'm using the SMTP client class
in order to email the messages.
I've already mentioned how this is
different from the default logger.
Why you care about this is that in Java,
it's still useful to log
things a lot of times,
and unfortunately, it's still necessary.
The debuggers can be pretty decent,
but sometimes it's unavoidable
when debugging things to log things
to understand what's happening.
One of the nice things about
this is that you can use the
default print stream loggers,
which is really just equivalent
to System.out.println and
is just as easy to use.
You get all the same capabilities,
but you don't have the problems
that Melissa alluded to,
and you also don't have to comment
the things out and recompile.
You can just leave it in there,
and you can turn off the loggers.
You can even configure that at runtime
using some command line arguments.
I'll refer you to the documentation
for more information on
those command line arguments.
This is just a demonstration
of one of the new features,
NSLog, in WebObjects 5,
but I hope that this demonstration
encourages you to take a
look at the whole product.
Thank you for your time.
Thanks.
Well, on to more stuff.
That was interesting and fun,
and I've still got less
interesting stuff to deal with,
so please bear with me.
NSLock.
This should be familiar to a lot of
you who were working with Objective-C.
There's three classes, NSLock,
NSMultireaderLock, NSRecursiveLock.
They all conform to the
NSLocking interface.
This basically says that thou shalt
implement the methods lock and unlock.
Mostly they're here to facilitate
conversion from WebObjects 4.5,
but they also are a little bit more
complicated and a little bit broader
than the Java synchronization mechanism.
So they can coordinate locking of
objects over a longer period or
over a more convoluted code path,
and they can allow developers to
do things that are kind of hard
to do using just synchronize.
A good example of that would
be the multireader lock.
Java's synchronization method doesn't
distinguish between reading or writing,
so it always locks the object
that you're looking at.
But if you're writing your application,
you may know that 99.9% of the
time it's going to be a read,
so it doesn't really matter
if multiple things are looking
at the data at the same time.
So you may want to use
a multireader lock,
which will end up only locking the
object when you're trying to write to it.
Key Value Coding,
a lot of you are probably
going to recognize that
name from previous versions.
It's a unified way to access
properties of different types.
It can access things that are in methods,
private methods, public methods,
instance variables.
NSKeyValueCoding is EOKeyValueCoding
split up into a number of pieces.
There's four abstract interfaces
that define the various
methods in key value coding.
There's an error handling interface,
and there are some default
implementations that we provide.
The first interface is
generic NSKeyValueCoding.
This is the very basic,
if you want key value coding behavior,
you must implement this interface.
It defines value for key
and take value for key.
It has a subclass,
NSKeyValueCodingAdditions,
which implements value for key
path and take value for key path.
The methods storedValueForKeyPath and
takeStoredValueForKey were defined
and split out into EOKeyValueCoding.
Again,
that's a subclass of NSKeyValueCoding.
And finally,
there's EOKeyValueCodingAdditions,
which defines the methods values for
keys and take values from dictionary.
This basically allows you to
implement whichever pieces
of the key values you want.
So you can use the key value coding
stuff you think you're going to need
in your application without having
to implement any of the rest of it.
In each interface,
we define two static inner classes.
There's the default implementation,
which is a convenient way to get
at the default behavior if you want
to add key value coding to a class.
And there's a utility class,
which is a convenient way
to get the default key value
coding behavior for any class,
whether or not it implements
the key value coding interface.
As I mentioned earlier,
we've gone to Java serialization.
NSCoder and NSCoding are abstract now,
and we've replaced our use of them with
the native Java serialization scheme.
We've left them in place in case
you had subclasses of NSCoding
that you wanted to continue using.
Any classes that implemented NSCoding
are now serializable in Java.
If you want to see an example
of how Java serialization works,
have a look at the persistent
session store example that
we shipped with WebObjects 5.
What are the advantages of doing this?
Java developers don't have to
learn a new archiving scheme,
which is a good thing.
The Java runtime framework
does all of the work.
It takes care of graph traversal,
it takes care of cycle analysis,
all of that stuff.
We don't have to worry about it anymore.
We can concentrate on
making WebObjects better.
WOMail delivery,
as RD was talking about earlier,
is based on sun.net.smtp.smtp client.
This is a protocol that
doesn't support CC or BCC,
so people who are CC'd will
also end up in the to field.
But it does allow mail pages to submit
forms or to see pictures because,
well, absolute URLs are generated.
JavaPlot.
Some of you may recognize
this from previous versions.
It's now AWT-based,
which means that all AWT fonts
are available and that
images are anti-aliased.
There's been a number of bug
fixes and some improvements.
Unfortunately, it's now subject to
limitations of the AWT,
which is essentially that
if you want to use it,
you have to have a
Windows server running.
This is a limitation that should vanish
when 1.4 is released later this year.
and the WoeSmile Framework.
Some of you may remember that we
demonstrated this at WWDC last year.
It's now part of the
official WebObjects product.
For those of you who don't know,
S-Smile is the synchronized
multimedia interface language.
It allows you to create smile content.
Smile is defined by W3C specification.
It allows you to generate
dynamic multimedia content,
which can be played
with QuickTime Player.
It's integrated with WebObjects
Builder for a drag and drop experience.
And it allows you to lay out your
multimedia project not only visually,
but also temporally,
so that you can specify not
only where things appear on
your multimedia application,
but when various pieces
of it start playing,
if you have streamed content.
And I think we're done.
In summary,
WebObjects 5 is pretty much the
same as WebObjects 4.5 and 4.5.1.
We haven't changed an awful lot.
We've added a few things.
We provide Java Converter
to help you migrate.
And we've added some new
stuff to encourage you to
move from 4.5 to WebObjects 5.
I think that's all I have to say.
Unfortunately, I can't play guitars and
I don't sing very well,
so I can't live up to
James Dempsey's yesterday.
And I think I'd like to call my QA team.
Actually, I think first I'm supposed
to mention the lab.
And it's open until 6
most days this week.
And I'm supposed to encourage you to vote
for WebObjects is the best app server.
Here's some of the other things
that you might be interested in,
some things that have changed between
WebObjects 4.5 and WebObjects 5.
There's a direct-to-Java client, XML,
later this afternoon,
and deployment has changed a bit.
And if you have feedback,
and I'm sure you will,
there's the feedback forum on Friday.
and a list of people to contact.
There's Tony, who's our director,
Bob Fraser, our marketer.
There's iServices.
Lots of URLs up there.